README.md, before:

# Ford-C-Max-NA-Hybrid-PHEV-CAN-bus-research

Repository of notes and data from my CAN sniffing and reverse engineering work on the NA Ford C-Max Hybrid/PHEV

[cmax_energi.dbc](https://github.com/cr08/Ford-C-Max-NA-Hybrid-PHEV-CAN-bus-research/blob/main/cmax_energi.dbc) - Continually evolving DBC file targeted to the C-Max Energi (specifically my own 2013 MY/SEL version). DBC file has been generated by Claude but all findings have been made by me with pattern matching assistance from Claude with additional verification/multiple test runs to confirm validity. All findings sourced from the I-CAN bus.

## CAN message/signal notes

Pleae refer to the DBC file linked above for full definitions. Below are just comments on the documented signals in a cleaner layout.

📊 = Data confirmed in CAN logs

❔= Signal details/explanation confirmed/verified

### 0x22A (554) - TCU_CmdVec

* Command vector for the TCU/telematics system to command the vehicle for remote start/lock/unlock and data refresh requests. All bytes set to 0x00. Byte 7 is the only known byte to be used.


| Signal          | Comments/Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 📊 | ❔ |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- | ---- |
| TcuCmd_Active   | One bit. 0 confirmed to be used both as a bus/vehicle wakeup (spammed until CAN activity is visible) and end-of-command sleep transition (sent at 1hz intervals for an undetermined period of time until stopped). 1 is used once the vehicle is awake and an active TCU command is still in progress. This value is broadcast at 1hz.                             | ✅ | ✅ |
| TcuCmd_EngCtrl  | Remote Start/Remote Stop command bits. Default 0 when not actively sending these commands. 1 used for Remote Start. 2 used for Remote Stop. When sending these commands, only a single message broadcast with this bit active is required. For remote start, a lock command should be sent before it (details below) with ideally a 1 second gap between commands. | ✅ | ✅ |
| TcuCmd_LockCtrl | Remote Lock and Unlock command bits. Default 0 when not actively sending these commands. 1 is used for Unlock. 2 used for Lock. Only a single message with the bit active needs to be broadcast.                                                                                                                                                                   | ✅ | ✅ |

### 0x167 (359) - VehicleOperatingModes_CGEA12

* Basic powertrain stats


| Signal            | Comments/Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 📊 | ❔ |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- | ---- |
| Eng_D_Stat        | Engine/ICE running status. As of writing only two statuses are seen on the C-Max: EngAutoStopped while vehicle is running and engine is off. EngOn when the engine is running.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | ✅ | ✅ |
| PwPckTq_D_Stat    | 'Powerpack' operation status. A more general powertrain operation and motive power availability status. PwPckOff_TqNotAvailable = Full vehicle powertrain (ICE+EV) is not operational and motive power not available. PwPckOn_TqNotAvailable = Full powertrain operational but motive power not available. Seen on remote start events as well as while the vehicle is plugged in (vehicle cannot be put into gear while plugged in by design). StartInPrgress_TqNotAvail = Start in progress value. On the C-Max being a hybrid vehicle this is seen VERY briefly. PwPckOn_TqAvailable = Full powertrain is operational and vehicle has motive power available. Indicative of a key-initiated start. | ✅ | ✅ |
| PlgActvArb_B_Actl | Energi/PHEV only. EVSE plug status. Self explanatory and one bit in use. 0 indicates the vehicle is unplugged. 1 indicates it is plugged in.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | ✅ | ✅ |

### 0x433 (1075) - BodyInfo_CGEA12

Lock/Door Ajar/Alarm statuses


| Signal          | Comments/Notes                                                                                                         | 📊 | ❔ |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---- | ---- |
| DoorAjar_Drv    | Driver's Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open           | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_Pax    | Front Passenger Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open    | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_RdrDrv | Driver side rear Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open   | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_RdrPax | Pasenger side rear Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_Hatch  | Hatch Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open              | ❌ | ❌ |
| SecurityArmed   | Perimeter alarm arming/active state. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Disarmed / 1 = Armed                    | ❌ | ❌ |
| Locked          | Vehicle lock status. Only two values have been seen so far, others may exist. 0 = Locked / 1 = Unlocked                | ✅ | ✅ |
| AlarmActive     | Status bit indicating if the perimeter alarm has been triggered. 0 = Normal operation / 1 = Alarm triggered/active     | ❌ | ❌ |

Commit message:

Add vehicle comments section to README
Added a section for random vehicle comments detailing the C-Max's architecture and hybrid features.

README.md, after:

# Ford-C-Max-NA-Hybrid-PHEV-CAN-bus-research

Repository of notes and data from my CAN sniffing and reverse engineering work on the NA Ford C-Max Hybrid/PHEV

[cmax_energi.dbc](https://github.com/cr08/Ford-C-Max-NA-Hybrid-PHEV-CAN-bus-research/blob/main/cmax_energi.dbc) - Continually evolving DBC file targeted to the C-Max Energi (specifically my own 2013 MY/SEL version). DBC file has been generated by Claude but all findings have been made by me with pattern matching assistance from Claude with additional verification/multiple test runs to confirm validity. All findings sourced from the I-CAN bus.

## Random vehicle comments

This vehicle has definitely been an interesting learning experience over the years. Despite the C-Max being a sibling of the Focus and Escape and having a lot of C1MCA electrical architecture, the hybrid and plug-in models destined for the North American market appears to have added a healthy mix of CGEA1.2 architecture likely relating to most of the added hybrid architecture. So in this CAN research there's some data that easily translates from the existing CGEA1.2 DBC files provided by Comma AI in their [OpenDBC](https://github.com/commaai/opendbc) repo while other data is C1MCA which, unfortunately, has a lot less public documentation. An interesting tidbit that has been found as part of the 4G TCU upgrade saga on these vehicles is their AsBuilt configuration HAS to be set to CGEA1.2 to fully function. Setting to C1MCA causes some features to be inoperative including the remote control functions. There have also been some AsBuilt configs in the Sync APIM with a similar behavior needing to be set to CGEA1.2.

## CAN message/signal notes

Pleae refer to the DBC file linked above for full definitions. Below are just comments on the documented signals in a cleaner layout.

📊 = Data confirmed in CAN logs

❔= Signal details/explanation confirmed/verified

### 0x22A (554) - TCU_CmdVec

* Command vector for the TCU/telematics system to command the vehicle for remote start/lock/unlock and data refresh requests. All bytes set to 0x00. Byte 7 is the only known byte to be used.


| Signal          | Comments/Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 📊 | ❔ |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- | ---- |
| TcuCmd_Active   | One bit. 0 confirmed to be used both as a bus/vehicle wakeup (spammed until CAN activity is visible) and end-of-command sleep transition (sent at 1hz intervals for an undetermined period of time until stopped). 1 is used once the vehicle is awake and an active TCU command is still in progress. This value is broadcast at 1hz.                             | ✅ | ✅ |
| TcuCmd_EngCtrl  | Remote Start/Remote Stop command bits. Default 0 when not actively sending these commands. 1 used for Remote Start. 2 used for Remote Stop. When sending these commands, only a single message broadcast with this bit active is required. For remote start, a lock command should be sent before it (details below) with ideally a 1 second gap between commands. | ✅ | ✅ |
| TcuCmd_LockCtrl | Remote Lock and Unlock command bits. Default 0 when not actively sending these commands. 1 is used for Unlock. 2 used for Lock. Only a single message with the bit active needs to be broadcast.                                                                                                                                                                   | ✅ | ✅ |

### 0x167 (359) - VehicleOperatingModes_CGEA12

* Basic powertrain stats


| Signal            | Comments/Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 📊 | ❔ |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- | ---- |
| Eng_D_Stat        | Engine/ICE running status. As of writing only two statuses are seen on the C-Max: EngAutoStopped while vehicle is running and engine is off. EngOn when the engine is running.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | ✅ | ✅ |
| PwPckTq_D_Stat    | 'Powerpack' operation status. A more general powertrain operation and motive power availability status. PwPckOff_TqNotAvailable = Full vehicle powertrain (ICE+EV) is not operational and motive power not available. PwPckOn_TqNotAvailable = Full powertrain operational but motive power not available. Seen on remote start events as well as while the vehicle is plugged in (vehicle cannot be put into gear while plugged in by design). StartInPrgress_TqNotAvail = Start in progress value. On the C-Max being a hybrid vehicle this is seen VERY briefly. PwPckOn_TqAvailable = Full powertrain is operational and vehicle has motive power available. Indicative of a key-initiated start. | ✅ | ✅ |
| PlgActvArb_B_Actl | Energi/PHEV only. EVSE plug status. Self explanatory and one bit in use. 0 indicates the vehicle is unplugged. 1 indicates it is plugged in.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | ✅ | ✅ |

### 0x433 (1075) - BodyInfo_CGEA12

Lock/Door Ajar/Alarm statuses


| Signal          | Comments/Notes                                                                                                         | 📊 | ❔ |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---- | ---- |
| DoorAjar_Drv    | Driver's Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open           | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_Pax    | Front Passenger Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open    | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_RdrDrv | Driver side rear Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open   | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_RdrPax | Pasenger side rear Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open | ❌ | ❌ |
| DoorAjar_Hatch  | Hatch Door Ajar status. Pattern matched only. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Closed / 1 = Open              | ❌ | ❌ |
| SecurityArmed   | Perimeter alarm arming/active state. Additional verification still needed. 0 = Disarmed / 1 = Armed                    | ❌ | ❌ |
| Locked          | Vehicle lock status. Only two values have been seen so far, others may exist. 0 = Locked / 1 = Unlocked                | ✅ | ✅ |
| AlarmActive     | Status bit indicating if the perimeter alarm has been triggered. 0 = Normal operation / 1 = Alarm triggered/active     | ❌ | ❌ |
